hello and welcome to the live stream for
the 17th of March 2023 the last one for
the week and it's Saint Patrick's Day
you may hear throughout this the
mournful whales of a cat that has been
kept outside uh
hopefully it doesn't come through on the
microphone but she is protesting about
not being allowed into the room like all
cats for some reason closed doors are
something they object to be that as it
may it is Saint Patrick's Day
uh uh here in Australia it's possibly
only the 16th of March for other people
we always tend to get to certain times
before the rest of the world given the
existence of time zones around the globe
of course
uh St Patrick well I was St Patrick
chosen as the patron saint of Ireland
well possibly an apocryphal tale he
explained the nature of the Christian
God as being one God like a clover
but in three parts the father Son and
the Holy Ghost so we had these different
aspects to this particular God he wasn't
um three separate Gods but rather one
God with three personalities so to speak
at the United Kingdom
um is kind of like that in a sense well
it's not three but it's four four
countries
in one Nation I suppose we might say
um you have Ireland England Scotland and
Wales wasn't until I moved there that I
realized that
there were these differences between the
United Kingdom
Britain the British Isles
England even that's how naive I was
before I I moved there back in my 20s
for a year
I didn't I honestly didn't realize that
England I say a separate thing to
Britain I thought these things were
synonyms for each other and the United
Kingdom
I just didn't know I was completely
ignorant
um I was a teacher over there and um
just asking some school kids they didn't
know either
um I guess it's something that people
pick up culturally as they go on
um throughout childhood in in England
and Scotland and Ireland and Wales the
differences between these different uh
terms for those land masses over there
and things
so the United Kingdom is
the four places
England that's the big bit
Northern Ireland I should say when it
comes to United Kingdom Scotland and
Wales Scotland right at the top and
Wales over to the west to the North and
the West
uh island has St Patrick as their patron
saint
England gets some George on the 23rd of
April so George
I bought something made out of out of
whole cloth in other words a completely
fictional Saint Patrick after all what
was Saint George famous for
slaying The Last Dragon
were there any dragons so if he's most
famous feat was something that could not
possibly have been accomplished uh
there's a question mark hanging over the
reality of Saint George now Wales has
Saint David on the 1st of March
and Scotland has an Andrews day on
November the 30th
uh
the English cross for Saint George and
George's cross forms part of the United
Kingdom's flag if you've ever wondered
why
the flag looks the way that it does
the Union Jack In other words it's
because you have this combination of
crosses
Saint George's cross
the red bit
I think the blue bit is for
um Scotland
and Wales is also represented there as
well but Scotland has the blue bit as
well
um
and so these are the these are the
Saints for uh the United Kingdom's
various countries and today just happens
to be Saint Patrick's Day and as I say
possibly a a
um an apocryphal Tale in terms of Saint
George um uh Saint George is often
invoked by the great Douglas Murray
Douglas Murray who talks about
um Saint George in retirement syndrome
it's a Georgian retirement syndrome is
where people striving for equality
achieve the outcome they want
win the battle defeat the Dragon
and then either look around for smaller
dragons to slay or in the worst
instances
cease to stop swinging their sword
but instead take on battles with
imaginary dragons
you can decide for yourself today
whether or not you know for example the
battles on gender sexuality are quality
more broadly certainly a quality before
the law in the justice system as a
matter of law
whether those battles have been won
whether throughout the
Western
world
we do have equality before the law and
so therefore
people who are continuing to battle for
equality before the law if that's what
they're doing
if they're still engaging in those
battles are they engaged likes and
George
swinging their sword at thin air because
there are no dragons left to slay
it's not the same people obviously today
fighting for certain things as there
were in the past but in the past people
were fighting for for example
quite rightly absolutely
should have fought for women to have the
vote for there to be no gender or
sex-based discrimination in the legal
system anywhere as a matter of law
when it comes to things
that the state can impose we should have
no distinction between different kinds
of people that's a form of
discrimination it could be
sexism or racism homophobia
Etc
so those things should be eviscerated
but once they are once they are
eviscerated as a matter of law
and the protests continue
we wonder what the voting public can do
to remedy a thing that is not there in
the law and so this is Saint George in
retirement syndrome which we need to be
careful of
it was I think President Biden who only
I noticed this week put out a tweet
about or in response to a a child had
written him a letter about how
women get paid less than men
uh and asking Joe Biden to do something
about that so what can Joe Biden do he's
a politician he's a lawmaker
he's one of the people who can pass laws
or regulations
is there a law or regulation that says
women must get paid less than men if
there is that should be corrected as a
matter of urgency that's discrimination
that's rank sexism but if there is
nothing there in the books
that a lawmaker can change
then
he's promising to do something about
this would seem to be
well misdirected at best
deceitful at worst
um
that's often you know the statistics
plan women get paid 70 cents on the
dollar for men
but not for doing precisely the same
work and insofar as it
exactly the same work
where is this happening
and why is this happening
and what does it mean to say exactly the
same work can you compare two CEOs of
two different companies
some companies are larger
some people work longer hours
people have talked about this before
that
great length
people make different decisions
throughout life but if there is a law
saying that women can only get paid 70
cents on the dollar for men that clearly
needs to be changed
within agreements that occur within
companies typically speaking there are
laws against paying different people
different wages for doing precisely the
same thing certainly based upon gender I
know that happened in Australia it is
simply illegal
to pay two people that are doing the
same job different amounts
except for matters of seniority you know
this happens in teaching for example two
teachers in classrooms next door to each
other could be getting paid quite
different things for doing exactly the
same thing because one of them has been
in the job longer for bizarre system all
you have to do is to sit around for long
enough I think the police are much the
same
and each year that goes by you get paid
a little more
just for hanging around
not for improving your performance I
guess on the assumption that you've
improved your performance or something
like that
if on the aggregate the statistics show
that men are getting paid more than
women
what is the deeper explanation are there
such things as danger money
men overwhelmingly work in jobs
like
well I shouldn't say overwhelmingly
as a proportion of the workforce
disproportionately men do things like
mining
arduous hard labor
bricklaying not to say that no women
does this woman does this
but if you have hardly any females
represented in these jobs
where in for example mining a premium is
paid because of the danger in being away
from home and all that kind of thing
that has happened in Australia people
work extremely remotely when I say
remotely not just behind a computer I
mean
in the middle of nowhere in Australia
and there's a vast parts of Australia
that are kind of nowhere in that sense
far far from uh never mind cities even
small towns where some mines happen to
be
and people go deep underground in
dangerous conditions and get paid a lot
of money for doing so
and so if you average out that kind of
thing
compared to let's say Child Care wherein
Child Care infant care the overwhelming
majority of the workforce is women
no wonder there's going to be a
discrepancy in the average pay just
comparing these two populations now
repeat for all the other life choices
that people make throughout their lives
so what would go by do about something
like that well the government I suppose
could insist that everyone regardless of
what you do mining or child care
get paid the same
that would equalize things
then we'd have a quality
of outcomes people talk about
which precisely what of course places
like North Korea do
okay
many of the rest of us think we
shouldn't
keep trying to slay this particular
Dragon of inequality that what we mean
by equality is equality before the law
is everyone being treated by the state
in the same way
because if that holds we're done that's
it
if in society there are inequities that
exist there then so long as the state
provides the conditions where people can
pursue opportunities that's all the role
that the state has then
Private Industry
and people of Goodwill
will employ the best people for the best
jobs based upon their
skills knowledge
and you know personality criteria
no one would want
to have a corporation which becomes
known for
unequal Employment Practices and by the
way as many other people have observed
if women really were
routinely able to be paid less for doing
exactly the same job as men why wouldn't
all corporations immediately fire most
of their male Workforce and take on
female Workforce at a much reduced cost
because I wouldn't have to pay them as
much
if that was really going on that's what
would happen
these evil corporations that are only
interested in profit should do that they
don't do that because it's just not true
that women get paid less than men for
doing the same job
women choose to do certain kinds of jobs
men choose to do certain kinds of jobs
women choose to work certain hours men
choose to work certain hours it's as
simple as that
in the western world where there are
already laws ensuring that you are not
allowed
to pay people different amounts for
doing the same thing based upon for
example
just the agenda
and many people
more knowledgeable about the issue than
I have spoken on that over and again
okay today I'm just going to go through
a series of questions and various other
things that I've been asked over the
last few days that I haven't gotten to
from patreon I have a supporter or the
podcast go to the
www.brethall.org if you'd like to
support my ongoing Endeavors here at
topcast in explaining the work of David
Deutsch world view that we get from Papa
Deutsch and related thinkers about
optimism progress and an Infinity before
us of knowledge creation and how we are
only constrained by our imaginations
which are unlimited and physics
which doesn't provide much of a
limitation on what we can do and the
amount of wealth we can create so if
you're interested in this kind of thing
yeah feel free to support via patreon as
Andrew gleave has done and he has asked
me
quote
explaining the scene in terms of the
Unseen is what people do and what
current AIS don't in fact current AI
current AI explains the scene in terms
of the scene during training
they are exceptionally good at
connecting the dots between the mountain
of existing knowledge they were trained
on and have already shown how
tremendously valuable they will be for
Humanity however
conjecturing the Unseen seems to be
bought seems to be what creativity is
all about generating new abstractions
maybe it's many people's mistaken belief
that induction will get us there versus
its conjecture all the way down thoughts
and quite
well not only is Andrew asked a question
there but I think has provided an
excellent explanation of precisely my
view on these kind of matters
um
yes
and it's a lovely way to put it and I've
said similar things myself but not quite
exactly the same way it is true
we explained the scene in terms of the
Unseen what do we see we see sunlight
you see light in general we see sunlight
and just by interpreting the sunlight by
passing it through our spectroscopes
a long chain of causal reasoning an
explanation
takes us back to the surface of this
vast sphere of hydrogen and helium gas
which is the Sun
and our explanation continues to take us
from the surface there deep deep into
the core where we have no hope ever of
seeing what's going on there what is
happening there is unseen we explain the
light that we do see on a bright
sunny day
as coming from an unseen place which is
where the interesting part of the
scientific explanation
is really going to
provide an account of physical reality
we're not so much interested in in in
just explaining that light is falling
upon the Earth
we want to know how it is that those
objects in the sky that we call the sun
and the Stars are producing the likes in
the first place these unseen reactions
Fusion reactions deep in the core of the
star
not only in practice but even in
principle
cannot be observed in principle I say
because to see something means
well it should mean it should mean
something like
being able to look at something having
an instrument whether it's your eyes or
some sort of artificial instrument
for being able to at least collect the
photons as reflected off that thing
no instrument
can survive
in the Sun
it can't survive near the surface of the
Sun much less into the core of the Sun
there is no such substance all
substances
doesn't matter what they're made of some
titanium tantalum tungsten alloy
with a melting point of whatever you
like goes up to about probably
I don't know three thousand four
thousand of the most Kelvin would have
no hope surviving on the surface much
less in the core of the Sun where it's
15 million Kelvin so we can't put
instruments there we only ever by the
way even if we could we'd still have
only indirect evidence but here we have
very indirect evidence by interpreting
light that falls upon the Earth
that has been emitted from the surface
of the Sun
and we infer and explain
to the core of the Sun but we don't see
anything okay so that's that that's what
we do
what does chat GPT in these AIS do
they get to see vast amounts of data in
their training and that forms the
library
so they can call on in order to answer
questions
so it's all seen and they can mash up
the scene
so it's simply explaining whatever
question you ask it
giving you a response in terms of what
it has already seen never going beyond
what is there in its Library
and so that's the the real kicker can it
ever come up with something not in its
Library
something it has never seen
explain something seen in terms of
oh that's the real test and I would say
no so I agree completely with Andrew
um
and it's a lovely way for him to put it
conjecturing the Unseen seems to be what
creativity is about creating new
abstractions yes
yes Andrew that is exactly right Andrew
goes on to say quote
finally the above made me think of the
every Point as a boundary point quote
current allies operate within the
boundary of a graph of knowledge humans
do not
they can add new vertices to the graph
via conjectured explanations or
abstractions knowledge grows along the
edges that connect to vertices and thus
we grow our knowledge it's maybe not a
great model but it dovetails with how
neural networks function and xenophonies
for all this but a woven web of guesses
end quote yes
I love what Andrew says that's exactly
right
current ai's operate within a fixed
boundary
they lack imagination
is what they lack what is this thing our
imagination I don't know
it's some kind of
capacity to
vary what we have in our minds the
content we already have here
by a little or a lot
by completely contradicting what
we think we know
postulating
fanciful worlds
and the way this world could be possibly
it's more than just envisaging what's
physically possible it's beyond that and
so therefore as some people sometimes
try and say well is it us seeing another
part of the Multiverse
Well it can't be that because we can
imagine
the violations of the laws of physics
which the Multiverse does not permit
so
and although all
um or physically possible fiction is
true in the Multiverse somewhere anytime
you imagine the spacecraft that travels
beyond the speed of light through space
you're imagining
something that can't possibly happen in
the Multiverse anywhere in any universe
because that would require different
laws of physics our laws of physics do
not allow material things to go beyond
the speed of light according to our best
explanation
okay
so we can imagine that
um
can chat GPT routinely imagine things
Beyond its uh
beyond the library that it's been
trained upon and then calls upon in
order to answer your questions
no
no it's not conjecturing new
abstractions
okay going on um
Professor Brian Keating who I believe is
a an astronomer
he surveyed on Twitter his followers
with
That Old Chestnut That Old Chestnut of a
question which was mathematics is a
discovered B invented and then he said
something else this morning
see too hard or whatever but basically
he was asking
is mathematics discovered or invented
this goes back I don't know how long
when you put the question that way is
mathematics discovered or invented it
confuses what you mean by the word
mathematics do you mean in fact the laws
of physics at times
when people say the laws of physics do
you mean the ultimate laws of physics
that govern physical reality as a matter
of absolute final pristine truth or do
you mean
our understanding of those laws of
physics the knowledge we have and the
explanations we have that imperfectly
capture
that somewhat ineffable thing which is
the
ultimate and perfect pristine laws of
physics
the difference between
the subject matter of the subject
and knowledge of that subject matter
particle physics is a a nice neat way of
thinking about this
particle physics ostensibly is about
what are the fundamental constituents of
matter fundamental
the most basic building blocks of matter
if you break everything down okay so we
have a theory at the moment it's called
the standard model it invokes things
like leptons which include electrons
aquax which are the building blocks of
protons and neutrons
the bosons things like photons which are
Force carriers Okay so
the standard model contains all these
things
and that's the state of
play at the moment state of matter if
you'd like to say
as far as we understand those things are
fundamental you can't take a quark and
split it in half you can't take an
electron and split it in half it's a
fundamental indivisible entity now is
that true
well there's Quantum field theory that
says well look maybe these things are
all excitations of the field which is
more fundamental still
but even then you know can you have
something deeper than that
are there particles within particles
well
our knowledge of matter at the moment
comes down to what the standard model
says but our knowledge of is different
too what the ultimate answer to that
question is
is there an end
to finding
the constituents of matter
is it the case that
just to be provocative
quarks are excitations of a field so in
some sense they're wave-like but those
waves actually are the vibrations of
smaller particles still
which are caused by waves that are
smaller still and someone you keep going
on forever
there is no end to this search or is
there just a brute fact of the matter
where the electron is
fundamental or some smaller particle
10 theories down the road
which is the smallest thing
well whatever the truth of that is
that's the fact of the matter and our
knowledge of that
is stands apart from it okay Ultimate
Reality in our knowledge of reality are
two separate things
so I've made that point before and I
think more than once throughout this
week on these live streams
what Professor Brian Keating is asking
there is ambiguous in a similar way
because mathematics
do you mean
and I responded the perfect abstract
truths of mathematics
or do you mean a knowledge of those
perfect abstract truths
let's do separate things so I said this
age-old question is always ambiguous we
can put this way the perfect abstract
truths of mathematics become imperfectly
known over time
discolored
by the invention
by the physical process of objective
knowledge creation knowledge invention
if you like
so both of these two things are working
in concert and so the succinct way of
putting that I said was
mathematical truth is discovered by
inventing knowledge about it
So when you say as mathematics invented
or discovered
it's both
because mathematical truth is out there
and then we discovered knowledge about
it
my Trope example I always go to is go to
Wikipedia look up what the biggest prime
number is
there is a number there are infinitely
many primes bigger than that
that's
a proof by Euclid
they're infinitely many Primes
so the next biggest one is out there
where is it well
that question Demands a an answer in
physical space
for an abstract entity there's no point
asking where is it
but we can say it exists
the next highest prime number
so
we
need to Discover It by searching
but even once we can write down that
next biggest prime number that writing
down is an invention of knowledge to
capture it
we're creating knowledge
about that abstract thing
what is this abstract thing by the way
you might as well just Linger on that
for a moment
you know my again go to way of talking
about this is if you were to write down
different representations for the number
two
even me just saying to cwo that is
in sound waves a representation of that
abstract number two
if I was to write down the letters t-w-o
that would be an abstract representation
the number two if I was to write the
numeral for two
whether in Indian Arabic numerals as
everyone is familiar with or two strokes
side by side as Roman numerals two dots
all of these things represent two if I
wrote eight over four if I wrote five
take away three there are an infinite
number of ways that I could write down
symbols to capture this number two but
at no point would I write down the
number two I would just write
representations of the number two I
would write symbols or
as people say numerals numerals aren't
numbers but are representations of
numbers
what's abstraction not to do about this
if you write down you know 10 different
representations of this number two then
what you can do is abstract out
the number two that's what an
abstraction is you you look at what is
common between all these things and what
is common to them all is
two the number which you can't write
but it is the thing that really exists
over and above all of them
that all of them are representing
the number two five take away three is
the number two two is the number two two
strokes is the number two
and so on ADD infinitum
the abstraction is the thing that you
learn
having written down these numbers in
fact I think as David Deutsch says in
the beginning of infinity infinity
numerals were discovered before numbers
people tallying you know counting how
many sheep are in the field by you know
drawing Strokes on rocks or something
had numerals
and they thought the numerals were just
you know The Strokes the marks
were there to represent physical things
physical things representing physical
things The Strokes representing the
number of sheep out there
keep a tally of them not until later did
people realize okay this counting thing
is about something more than sheep and
stuff and physical stuff
it indicates an abstract reality we can
abstract away from this
system of counting
numbers which are independent of any
representation of them and have
curious complexity about them things
like prime numbers
an unpredictable sequence of
atomic numbers
the combination of which can make any
other number that you can think of sort
of a remarkable fact that would not have
been expected and often isn't expected
by people
it's still amazing to me
but for any number that you can write
down
that number can be written as a
combination of prime numbers
the prime numbers really are
Atomic in that sense they're simple
and it's combinations of them that give
you everything else
yeah
okay so that's Professor Brian Keaton
and the misconception about whether or
not mathematics is invented or
discovered I would say the misconceived
question the misconceived question
okay next also from Twitter um
I was re-listening to
and I'm generating some more content on
the conversation between Naval and David
Deutsche the first of the conversations
that have
um been released there
and there's a wonderful there's a whole
bunch of wonderful things that David and
Naval say in that but one thing that
David said in that conversation they had
released recently got into naval's
website to hear it if you haven't
already heard it the conversation
between David and the vale but at one
point
um
well David says quote
to explain what happens on the surface
of the Earth
you need to know everything in the
universe that's knowable end quote
and this was his explanation of the
difference between human beings and
everything else in the physical universe
that human beings are special because in
order to understand them
you need to understand everything else
and so I I've explained that quote in my
own tweet by saying
because so why would you need to know
everything else in the universe that's
knowable to explain what's happening on
the surface of the Earth I said because
Earth is where the people are
to understand people means understanding
what they understand and they're working
on doing and on for everything in
physics philosophy and everything
so David uses the example of if
you want to understand why you know this
one fellow Einstein
you know got this medal
um uh which he did he got the Nobel
Prize he went to Stockholm why did why
did these monkeys in Stockholm give this
monkey Einstein gold well if you wanted
to really understand that why that's
happening you would have to understand
this guy Einstein
he went over there he got the the Nobel
Prize for the the photoelectric effect
so you need to understand the
photoelectric effect
you'd have to understand okay
well this guy Einstein he's a physicist
what's you know why is he studying this
photoelectric thing electric affecting
because it's a physicist what's a
physicist someone who studies physics
may he also happens to have studied
general relativity so he'd be led down a
a trail of general relativity
so in order to understand Einstein
you're automatically understanding a
whole bunch of physics
and you're wanting to do that because
well you wanted to understand why these
people are giving that person gold ah
it's an award it's an award for science
so you're beginning to understand the
culture
to understand people means to understand
everything to understand the surface of
the Earth means to understand everything
because for any one person you know this
one might be a philosopher ah what does
a philosopher do what does this
philosopher doing oh they're looking at
morality what's morality you've got to
look at that this one's a mathematician
okay to understand what they're doing
we're going to understand mathematics
and so on for everything and so this is
why David says
to understand humans means understanding
everything else because that's what
humans are trying to do to understand
everything else
you can never get to a final
understanding of them it's much the same
as being unable to get to a final
understanding of the universe itself
that's why I like Geron lineares quip
that a human a person is an infinite
well of Mystery
I think David and Jeron come out the
ineffable nature of
the person from different directions
I'd say John's probably
um sometimes less precise but it still
it captures the same kind of idea same
kind of idea that people are
infinitely complex
David will go on to say why because
they consider explanations of everything
and everything has infinite complexity
um
and David responded to me to say that um
and this is not true of any other
location that we know of in the universe
but it will soon be true of the Moon and
then Mars yes
and so as people spread throughout the
solar system the Galaxy the universe
those places become
unable to be explained in terms of just
the physical forces as people spread
throughout the cosmos
the job of the astrophysicist becomes
ever more difficult the job of the
general scientist becomes a little more
difficult because to explain the
processes that happen there
uh in full
I'm saying full provided advisedly
you would need to have an understanding
of human beings which is not the job of
the astrophysicist of course
it might very well be in the distant
future that
astrophysics becomes so good at what it
does
it allows people to routinely control
the rate at which
Stars Burn and so therefore
to know something about how far or the
rate at which stars burn you will need
to know why people are choosing to
affect the fusion rate the the still a
fusion rate of stars
then it doesn't become just a matter of
astrophysics
but also out of psychology which is kind
of a remarkable thing
um Thomas shadox has responded to David
and said
um if you knew everything that's
knowable would you be able to explain
everything that happened on the surface
of the Earth
and I leapt in here
rudely I suppose yeah I responded I said
um
if the impossible obtains then anything
follows including that but we cannot
know everything that's knowable if we
could that would mean an end of progress
it would mean a complete solution that
reveals no more problems a solution of
which we cannot ask why that okay so
Thomas has asked but if we knew
everything that's knowable then we could
explain everything on the surface the
Earth yeah sure
but it's impossible to know everything
that's knowable so we can roll that out
but if if you want me to Grant the
premise that you can know everything
that's Noble then yeah sure that follows
but then so there's a whole bunch of
other stuff as well because now you're
in the realm of impossibility I would
say
you can't know everything that's
knowable because that means having a
complete picture of
well having a complete picture of any
one thing I argue entails having a
complete picture of the whole
because the whole
effects
the individual parts of reality
there just is this necessary connection
between everything
even if it's just gravitational
our best explanation of gravity at the
moment says that
it doesn't indicate to zero
there's always an effect right the
curvature of space-time is is stretches
throughout space it just gets ever
smaller and smaller and smaller okay
quantum gravity might change that
um
so we can't know everything that's
normal
if we could
have a final
explanation a perfect pristine
explanation
that was in some sense self-contained
about anything
that would mean that explanation that
solution to the problem we had itself
reveals no more problems but this is not
the character of explanation that exists
in our universe our universe is such
that
when you explain something it allows you
to see more it opens up more questions
it reveals more problems that's what
happens
you don't reduce the number of problems
and questions you increase them by
finding Solutions they're better
problems to have but they are more
problems and we should expect that to
continue not
that we'll find a solution one day which
reveals why we've got no more questions
to ask in particular we could always ask
why is that the case and not something
else
some people want to say well maybe it
will be revealed that of mathematical
necessity
I don't buy that
why is that mathematically necessary
rather than just contingent
the laws of physics could have been
various other ways for example
why would you say they are necessary or
necessarily the case
when people invoke that kind of argument
I think it's a it's a faith claim lots
of things either way they are of
mathematical necessity but there's
nothing about them at the moment in
their present form it says it's
mathematically required they need to be
that way
uh throughout Twitter I'm not choosing
anyone in particular here but a number
of times
the same sentiment arose on Twitter
which is about the principle of optimism
optimism in general
as being about whether or not
we should say things can get better
versus things will get better
and I think this is a an incorrect
framing of the way in which to
understand the problems of soluble
notion
it's certainly the case
that we can't argue as optimists that
things must get better that it is
inevitable
inevitable is the key
we can't say it's inevitable things will
get better so put your feet up and relax
because things must get better the
universe
the laws of the universe are such the
things just
irrevocably get better
that's the story of the past and that
should happen in the future that's
induction
but I think we can be a little bit
stronger
rather a lot of the time then nearly
saying things can get better although
that's true of course things can get
better
I think we can argue something less than
things must get better but more than
only things can get better which is why
I say sometimes I'm happy to say myself
without embarrassment but things will
get better
is this a prophecy
for any one particular thing it can be
if I say
we will find the cure for all cancers
well firstly I haven't put a win on
there but as soon as I did
that would absolutely be a prophecy
if I say within the next 10 years we
will we will have a cure for breast and
prostate cancer
prophecy
I've got no reason for thinking that
there's no good explanation behind that
I'm guessing it
knowledge yet to be created
can't do it it's prophetic it's not
reasonable
however
I think that broadly speaking if we have
an understanding of what people are what
stabilization is what
we tend to do
where the conditions are good or bad
then we can make claims about the world
getting better and an expectation the
world will get better
to say that
the world will get better
I don't think
is a prophecy
say it's inevitable but absolutely the
world will get better
could be
the world will get better because
people want to solve their problems that
won't change tomorrow or next week
we can never reach
a condition where people will sit back
and be satisfied
with their lives they will always want
to create more knowledge
they will always want to create more
wealth they will always be in a
problematic circumstance
our civilization is a resilient
civilization
it is stable while undergoing rapid
progress
and as more progress happens we want
more rapid progress still
and this fact about us shouldn't be
expected to change
and for these reasons
because people will want to solve their
problems and have the expectation that
every new generation will live longer
than the previous generation that every
new generation will
thrive in a world that is better than
that of their parents and grandparents
that the free ubiquitous distribution of
knowledge and hopefully of energy not to
mention all of the other resources that
we use
and computation
but the costs of all of these things on
the aggregate will go down as a
proportion of people's income
that
it will become
next to the price of mere raw materials
to give everyone access to all the
knowledge in the world carried in their
pocket
because this sort of thing will just
continue and there's no reason to think
it will stop then on the whole I think
we're entitled to say things will get
better
this is not a reason to put our feet up
things will get better because we won't
put our feet up and we shouldn't expect
anyone will
so it's I think it's sometimes it can be
we can be a little stronger than merely
things can get better in certain moods
now if you take that out as things must
get better
or it's inevitable that things will get
better that's different
I think we occupy a part of physical
reality where
we have the knowledge of how to make
things better and people will continue
to make that choice because why would
they do otherwise what is the best
explanation of our present circumstance
that tomorrow we will continue to want
to strive to make things better or not
and if we can explain what people are
doing as problem solvers and knowledge
creators in terms of
moving from worse problems to better
problems then again that's an argument
that things will get better
so I think we're entitled to say that
because we're entitled to say certain
things about people broadly speaking
there will be blips there'll be
backtracks there'll be
wrong turns
so it's not inevitable
but but the best explanation of what's
going on with people at any point since
the beginning of the Enlightenment is
they make things better because they
choose to and so so we should expect
them to continue to make the same
choices
to make things better faster and so that
will only become more true over time
the person doing this job
of
you know having a a platform where they
explain optimism and progress
in 100 years will only make that point
more strongly still
because over the next hundred years
things are going to ramp up far more
rapidly and be far better than the last
hundred years and so it will only be
more obvious that if I could make this
conjecture now that things will get
better
all the while admitting this is not
a strict prediction
I'm not saying specifically what things
will get better
just that people do this
then in a hundred years from now
whoever's doing a similar job to me
arguing for optimism
we'll have an easier time we had to
point to me and say hey look see this
guy back when things were primitive and
awful by the standards of today
even he was saying that things were
going to get better that poor Denizen of
the past
with all the
destruction and death and suffering and
expense of living in that time
was somehow able to see how wonderful
the world was well look at us now look
how good it is now 100 years later
should we expect things to stagnate
tomorrow or get worse no what should we
expect we should expect things will get
better
they will be saying that more strongly
more loudly and in fact one would hope
pessimism has largely been removed like
a cancerous tumor that it is from
society
and everyone will have the expectation
of things getting better which means
that things will get better even faster
because people won't be held back by the
naysayers on the sidelines carping about
resource use and inequality
they will understand that
inequality is the very thing
which allows for people to pursue
separate interests that's what you want
and if someone wants to work one day a
week
and someone wants to work seven days a
week we should expect different outcomes
from a free society that allows that
kind of thing that's wonderful
okay that's that
um someone has asked me about a chat GPT
answer TP reader TP reader on Twitter
has said quote
I'd be interested to hear your views on
whether this summary of pauper's
objective knowledge and evolutionary
approach one of my favorite books of all
time
provided by Church Deputy is any good or
misses the point many thanks okay
so we've got TP readers
um question two chat GPT about Carl
Popper's book
this book objective knowledge is a
series of essays
more than like you know just a book
chapter so to speak it's not like you
pick this up and it reads like the
fabric of reality the beginner infinity
or most other books it's a collection of
essays which sometimes they repeat the
content uh sometimes they can seem
completely different in terms of what
they're talking about one chapter from
another it's not like you have this okay
they may not be regarded as completely
connected each essay it starts off with
the refutation of induction among other
things he moves on throughout the book
you know talks about things like the
uh the bucket and Searchlight
it's about how the
different visions of knowledge you know
what we're doing are we are we filling
up a bucket which is our minds
when we create knowledge
or are we searching is our mind more of
a Searchlight
um
Okay so
chat GPT has summarized
after being given this prompt The Prompt
was could you please summarize Carl
Popper's book objective knowledge and
evolutionary approach and Chachi BT has
said I don't know if it's four or three
I've got a feeling this is 3.5 Okay so
it's pretty brief so I'll read through
it
quote Carl poppers book objective not an
evolutionary approach presents a theory
of knowledge that focuses on The
evolutionary nature of scientific
knowledge popper argues that scientific
knowledge is not absolute but rather it
is an evolving process of conjecture and
refutation
so far so good
let's keep going
um pop believes that knowledge is always
tentative and can never be proven true
but rather it can only be falsified in
other words scientific theories are only
provisionally accepted until they are
proven false proper also argues that
scientific theories can never be
verified but they can be tested and
potentially falsified end quote okay we
have to be careful here chat GPT is
falling into the mistake that many do in
thinking that Carl Poppa
or David Deutsch et cetera
when they speak of knowledge are only
referring to Scientific explanations and
we're not they're not
popper is not talking only about
scientific explanations now he's rightly
famous for figuring out the line of
demarcation between science and other
stuff
the line of demarcation is can you do an
experimental test
to decide between these two theories
these two claims about physical reality
if you can then you're doing science if
you can't you're doing something else
you're doing something else you might be
doing metaphysics very useful you might
be doing mathematics okay there might
not be some experimental test there
might be a proof
in Morality the two theories don't need
to be experimentally tested in order to
refute one of them
um
only in science do we worry about this
concept of falsifiability and
falsifiability is a term
that is a uh just a convenient way of
talking about
what happens during an experiment a
crucial test
experimental crucial test which is where
you have
two theories
you do an experiment and it goes one way
if one theory is false and it goes the
other way after the other theory is
false now ideally it does go one way and
shows that one of the series is false
okay does not comport with physical
reality the experimental test refutes
that
Theory it falsifies it
what do you mean falsifiers doesn't that
mean you've proven it true that it's
false no what we say is the best
explanation of what's going on
our statements about that theory are
that it's false
not forever for all time absolutely our
best explanation is our fallible
understanding is that that theory is
false not false in the
um strict mathematical logical sense and
we say once and for all
we say our best explanation is
that this Theory can't explain the
evidence can't explain the outcome of
the experiment but this Theory does
okay so that's science but chat apt is
immediately conflated we've gone from
saying Papa believes that knowledge is
always tentative well firstly popper
said he is not a philosopher of belief
that's one thing so he was sort of he
was very this is why I try not to use
this word believe or belief because it's
subjective
part of psychology whether you believe
something or not a bearing on you know
whether it's a good explanation much
less true
and so we don't need to in knowledge
ever consider belief belief insofar as
it exists at all and I'm not convinced
would be the domain of psychology what
people's beliefs are
but I'm you know broadly speaking that's
not a part of my wheelhouse or interests
in people's personal psychology I'm
interested in knowledge some knowledge
is represented inside of
brains
lines
and so we can talk about that the
objective criteria but whether you
believe something or not has no bearing
on whether it's a good explanation
anyway that said
Papa believes that knowledge is always
tentative okay tick all right
and can never be proven true
tick but rather it can only be falsified
cross
because cross because
falsification properly considered is
about the experimental outcome of a
particular crucial test in science the
philosophy of science but saying you
have forced fighter moral theory is to
my mind and I'm not going to stick on
you know Vick and silly and say you
can't use that word you can use that
word if you want but my preference is
and I think popper goes the same way
here is that falsification is a kind of
refutation you can refute as in
criticize
any theory that you like mathematical
philosophical political economic
historical scientific whatever
but falsification is reserved for the
specific kind of refutation or of
criticism
we can criticize
other theories without ever doing an
experimental test and I've talked about
this a lot you know you get the the
grass cure is the famous One
you never have to test whether or not
the grass is going to cure your cold
okay it is refutable on the basis that
refutable and they said it has no
mechanism of action provided how does
the grass cure your cold
without that and someone just comes to
you with it you don't need to test it
you can refute it
on that basis
that which is asserted without a good
explanation
can be
denied without good explanation
I think Christy hitchinson said that
that which can be asserted without
evidence can be uh denied with that
event something like that not quite not
quite
for example that very claim what can be
a certain evidence can be denied with
that evidence is itself a claim that
comes without any evidence
can we refute it can I deny it I don't
think so not on that basis but on on the
basis that not everything comes down to
evidence
okay anyway chat GPT goes on to say
quote
Papa's theory of knowledge is based on
his concept of world three which refers
to the realm of human knowledge and
ideas Papa sees knowledge as evolving
through the interaction of three Worlds
the physical world world one uh the
world of our mental States
well to and the world of objective
knowledge that emerges from our mental
States
overall purpose book objective knowledge
and evolutionary approach presents a
view of scientific knowledge as a
constantly evolving and improving
process that is always subject to
falsification and revision
end quote yeah okay yeah so that last
bit's okay so scientific knowledge is
constantly evolving
and improving
always subject to falsification and
revision okay take out falsification and
true of all knowledge okay all knowledge
is a constantly evolving and improving
process this is always subject to a
revision
a refutation and better conjectures
um yeah so publish three worlds you've
got your physical world
then you've got
your world of subjective experience
okay the the
um
your world of feelings
your world of experience that's going on
inside of your skull the privacy of your
own mind
what the blue sky looks to you like what
chocolate ice cream taste do you like
what the rose smells like to you these
are all things
that are not part of the physical world
they're part of your subjective
experience of the physical world
but they're also not part of
our
third person objective knowledge of the
world either
so this is why he has that second world
but one the physical world of stuff that
we want to explain
world two our subjective states which we
also might want to explain and world
three
the world of objective explanations
there is three worlds and so they're all
interconnected
uh
World 3 containing which is the world of
explanations can contain explanations of
the first two
we don't have good explanations of world
two years you know why do why does
chocolate ice cream taste the way it
does to you
how does it taste to you
okay all of that stuff would be an
explanation of world two explanations of
world one
uh you know all the explanations of
Science and of mathematics and of
history and so on and so forth
explanations of world three is
epistemology
so world three is explanations
and you can explain explanations
so the world three commenting on world
three
world one can constrain world free
world one has the laws of physics in it
which determine what it's possible for
brains to do and therefore what Minds
can do
and therefore what explanations what
knowledge can actually be generated
so that's world one having an effect on
world three
And So It Goes
um there's a few questions on
let's see
um Twitter
but I think I think I might save I might
save some of those for another time
because I'm coming up to just over an
hour now
um
and philosopher on YouTube has said
thank you for making this content and my
channel is criminally underrated that's
very kind of you
um
yes uh so I think that'll do me for now
an hour on
um Friday these things always take a
little time to set up and then record
and I've been putting them out on audio
as well so they're going out via the
regular podcasts
um Regular podcast is
um doing very well in terms of number of
listens or well up over 600 000
downloads now which is um quite amazing
um but that will do me for now perhaps
more live streams next week I can't
imagine I'll do one every single day
next week I want to
put out a regular top class that I've
properly edited and so on and so forth
and again if you'd like to support this
endeavor
feel free to go to
www.brethall.org and follow the links
that are right there to patreon for
example but until next time bye-bye